Add open day slide (#1)
ninochang/presentations: swag-2024-Q1-openday/slides.md

footer: **SWAG** backend team
slidenumbers: true
build-lists: false

# [fit] Go download **demo** resources.
- https://shortlink/resource.
- An QRCode

---

![fit](cover.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT
- Deep dive into SRT

> - Our choise

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Our choice
```

- DEMO

---
![original](background.png)

# [fit] [TODO]一張圖開場，stream protocol 的演進

---
[.build-lists: false]
![original](background.png)

# RTMP 
- **TCP** based
- Supported codecs:
    - video: H.264
    - audio: AAC
- Latency (3 ~ 5s)
- RTMP still supported on many platform as publish protocol even though flash player is offically dead.
    
---
![original](background.png)

# RTMP - Summary
- Pros:
    - High device compatabillity
    - Low resource usage due to TCP packets ordering.
- Cons:
    - Old codecs
    - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issues.

^ 
- 完全依賴TCP 處理 loss packet, 容易在網路不穩情況受 congestion control 影響造成 delay.

> - Enhanced-RTMP support VP9, HEVC, and AV1

Reviewer: Link on main presentation

Reviewer: https://github.com/veovera/enhanced-rtmp

Reviewer: ```
[^1]: [RTMP Extended](https://github.com/veovera/enhanced-rtmp)
```

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC

- **UDP** (default) and **TCP**
- Supported codecs:
    - video: VP8, VP9, H.264 (H.265, AV1 ... in progress)
    - audio: Opus (... inprogress)

> - Lattency (< 500ms)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Latency (< 500ms)
```

- Products: 
    - Discord [^1]
    - Google meet

[^1]: [Discord blog discribe their webRTC architecture](https://discord.com/blog/how-discord-handles-two-and-half-million-concurrent-voice-users-using-webrtc)

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why WebRTC is not codec agnostic ?
- Relies codes supported by underlying browser.

> - Browser don't support specific codec for various reason, like expensive livense to use H.265.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Browser don't support specific codec for various reasons, like expensive license to use H.265.
```

> - Hardware encoding requirement for some codec like H.265, AV1 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hardware encoding requirement for some codecs like H.265, AV1 
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Hardware acceleration requirement for some codec like H.265, AV1 
```

> (But newer chrome starts support hardware encode)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(But newer chrome starts support hardware acceleration)
```

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)
# How does WebRTC handle packet loss ?

> - Forward Error Correction (FEC): Add redundant information to the transmitted packets, Allowing receiver to reconstruct lost packets even if they are not received.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Forward Error Correction (FEC): Add redundant information to the transmitted packets, allowing receiver to reconstruct lost packets even if they are not received.
```

> - NACK: NACK notify sender to retransmit missing packets and fill in the gaps to maintain playback continuity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- NACK: The receiver can notify sender to retransmit missing packets and fill in the gaps to maintain playback continuity.
```

> - Adaptive bitrate control: Dynamically adjust the bitrate of the transmitted media stream based on network conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adaptive Bitrate Control: Dynamically adjust the bitrate of the transmitted media stream based on network conditions.
```

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Summary

- Pros:
    - Strong security ensured by SRTP[^2]
    - Strong Community support, work on almost every browser.
    - High stability under bad network
- Cons:
    - Hard to scale when there's multi participants
    

[^2]: [Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based
- Supported codec: codec agnostic
- Lattency: (< 500ms)
- Loss packet handling: FEC, ARQ, Too-late packet
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery (TSBPD)

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why SRT codec agnostic ?
- It doesn't have any codec limitation on data processing, 
the responsibility of encoding/decoding fall on upstream app using SRT.

> - Acting as a normal udp packet wrap SRT content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Acts as a normal UDP packet that wraps SRT content.
```

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT - Summary

- Pros:
    - Codec agnostic

>     - Strong security ensured by AES encrypted content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Strong security ensured by built-in AES.
```

>     - High stability under bad network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - High stability under bad network conditions
```

- Cons:
    - Not support by native web, require special player.
    - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality

---
![original](background.png)

| Protocol | RTMP | WebRTC | SRT |
| --- | --- | --- |--- |

> | Supported codecs |H.264, AAC| H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Supported Codecs |H.264, AAC| H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited |
```

| Latency | < 5s | < 500ms | < 500ms|

> | Security | Need Extension | Built in | Built in (AES) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Security | RTMPS/RTMPE | Built in | Built in (AES) |
```

| Disruption Tolerance | Average | Good | Good |

---
[.build-lists: true]
<!-- ![original](background.png) -->
# [fit] Quest: What video/audio codec does 
# [fit] **RTMP** support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
<!-- ![original](background.png) -->

# [fit] Deep dive into
# [fit]  **SRT**

---
![original](background.png)

# Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery
Timestamps allow the decoder to **reorder** packets if they arrive out of order due to network delays or retransmissions. Ensuring frames are decoded and displayed in the correct order.

---

> ![inline](srt-tsbpd.png)

Reviewer: Switch positions

--- 
![original](background.png)

# Automatic Repeat Request

---
# Packet Delivery Time
[TODO]
- Describe fomulla.

---
# [fit] Quest: packet delivery time 

---
![original](background.png)
# Too Late Packet

---
![inline](srt-too-late-packet-drop.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC References:
- https://medium.com/agora-io/how-does-webrtc-work-996748603141
- https://www.100ms.live/blog/webrtc-turn-server

---

> ![original](background.png)

Reviewer: Why didn't we use WebRTC back then ?
- It wasn't mature enough
- Develope time constraints (RTMP is better supported all around)

footer: **SWAG** backend team
slidenumbers: true
build-lists: false

![original](background.png)

# [fit] [TODO]一張圖開場，stream protocol 的演進

---
![fit](cover.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT
- Deep dive into SRT
- Why we switch from RTMP to SRT
- DEMO

---
![original](background.png)

# [fit] Reminder download resource for demo.
[TODO] list of resource.

---
[.build-lists: false]
![original](background.png)

# RTMP 
- **TCP** based

> - Supported codec:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supported codecs:
```

    - video: H.264
    - audio: AAC
- Support first mile and last mile.
- RTMP still supported on many platform as first mile protocol.
    
---
![original](background.png)

# RTMP - Summary
- Pros:
    - Multicast support
    - Low buffering
- Cons:
    - Old codecs
    - Relative high latency (~30s)

>     - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issues.
```

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC

- **UDP** (default) and **TCP**
- Supported codec:
    - video: VP8, VP9, H.264
    - audio: Opus

- Products: 
    - Discord [^1]
    - Google meet

[^1]: [Discord blog discribe their webRTC architecture](https://discord.com/blog/how-discord-handles-two-and-half-million-concurrent-voice-users-using-webrtc)

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Connection Flow

1. Exchange SDP with **Signaling Server**
2. Collect **ICE candidates** with TURN server
3. Exchange ICE candidates

> 4. **UDP whole punching** estiblish connection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **UDP hole punching** estaiblish connection
```

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Connection Flow

![inline](webrtc-connection.gif)

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - TURN

![inline](webrtc-TURN.gif)

^ If NAT or Firewall configuration doesn't allow peer connect directly, need rely on TURN server relay.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - SDP

- Session Description Protocol (SDP)
- Communicate **codec, address, media type, audio and video** between peers.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - ICE candidates

- Set of **public IP address and port** that could potentially be an address that receives data.
- Client will gathere them by making a series of requests to a STUN server.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Summary

- Pros:
    - Sub-second latency

>     - Stron security ensured by SRTP[^2]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Strong security ensured by SRTP[^2]
```

    - Strong Community support, work on almost every browser
- Cons:
    - Maintain STUN and TURN server
    - Hard to scale when there's multi participants
    

[^2]: [Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based
- Supported codec: content agnostic
- Products

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT - Summary

- Pros:
    - Codec agnostic

>     - AED encrypted content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - AES encrypted content
```

    - High stability under bad network
- Cons:
    - Not support by native web, require special player.
    - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality

---

| Protocol | RTMP | WebRTC | SRT |
| --- | --- | --- |--- |
| Supported codecs |H.264, AAC| H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited |
| Latency | < 5s | < 500ms | < 500ms|

> | Security | Need Extension | Build in | Build in AES |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Security | Need Extension | Built in | Built in (AES) |
```

| Disruption Tolerance | Average | Good | Good |

---
[.build-lists: true]
# Quest: What video/audio codec does RTMP support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
# [fit] Deep dive into 
# [fit] **SRT**

---
# Deep dive into SRT
- Packet structure
- Handshake
- Acknowledgement and Loss Packet Handling
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery

> - Too late packet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Too late packet drop
```

footer: **SWAG** backend team
slidenumbers: true
build-lists: false

# [fit] Go download **demo** resources.
- https://shortlink/resource.

> - An QRCode

Reviewer: - OBS https://obsproject.com/
- VLC https://www.videolan.org/vlc/index.zh_TW.html
- FFplay

---

![fit](cover.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT
- Deep dive into SRT
- What protocol are we use, why ?
- DEMO

---
[.footer: https://www.wowza.com/blog/history-of-streaming-media]

> ![inline](livestream-protocols-1.png) ![inline](livestream-protocols-2.png)

Reviewer: Need a new picture that focuses on publishing protocols only

![original](background.png)

# RTMP 
- **TCP** based
- Supported codecs:
    - video: H.264
    - audio: AAC
- Latency (3 ~ 5s)
- RTMP still supported on many platform as publish protocol even though flash player is offically dead.
    
---
![original](background.png)

# RTMP - Summary
- Pros:
    - High device compatabillity
    - Low resource usage due to TCP packets ordering.
- Cons:
    - Old codecs
    - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issues.

^ 
- Adobe stop update RTMP and didn't submit to RFC.
- 完全依賴TCP 處理 loss packet, 容易在網路不穩情況受 congestion control 影響造成 delay.
- Enhanced-RTMP support VP9, HEVC, and AV1

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC

- **UDP** (default) and **TCP** (TURN)
- Supported codecs:
    - video: VP8, VP9, H.264 (H.265, AV1 ... in progress)
    - audio: Opus (... inprogress)
- Latency (< 500ms)
- Products: Discord [^1] ,Google meet

[^1]: [Discord blog discribe their webRTC architecture](https://discord.com/blog/how-discord-handles-two-and-half-million-concurrent-voice-users-using-webrtc)

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why WebRTC is not codec agnostic ?
- Relies codecs supported by underlying browser.

> - Browser don't support specific codec for various reasons, like expensive livense to use H.265.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Browsers don't support specific codecs for various reasons, like expensive license to use H.265.
```

[^3]: [Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based
- Supported codec: codec agnostic
- Latency: (< 500ms)
- Loss packet handling: FEC, ARQ, Too-late packet
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery (TSBPD), optimize decoder performance.

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why SRT codec agnostic ?
- It doesn't have any codecs limitation on data processing, 
the responsibility of encoding/decoding fall on upstream app using SRT.
- Acts as a normal udp packet that wraps SRT content.

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT - Summary

- Pros:
    - Codec agnostic
    - High stability under bad network conditions
    - Strong security ensured by built-in AES.
- Cons:
    - Not support by native web, require special player.
    - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality

---
![original](background.png)

| Protocol | RTMP | WebRTC | SRT |
| --- | --- | --- |--- |
| Supported Codecs |H.264, AAC| H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited |
| Latency | < 5s | < 500ms | < 500ms|

> | Security | RTMPS/RTMPE | Built in | Built in (AES) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Security | RTMPS/RTMPE | Built in (DTLS, SRTP) | Built in (AES) |
```

- Periodically packet loss report.

---
[.build-lists: true]
# Packet Delivery Time

$$PktTsbpdTime = TsbpdTimeBase + PktTimestamp + TsbpdDelay + Drift$$

- $$TsbpdTimeBase$$ : Time base reflects the time difference between local clock of the receiver and the sender
- $$PktTimestamp$$ : Data packet timestamp
- $$TsbpdDelay$$ : SRT Latency, negotiated between sender and receiver on handshake.
- $$Drift$$ : Adjust the fluctuations between sender and receiver clock.

---

| Serial Number | PktTimestamp | Time Base    | RCV Clock    | SRT Latency | Drift | Packet Delivery Time |
|---------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------------|-------|----------------------|
| 1             | 20           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,060 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,180         |
| 2             | 40           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,080 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,200         |
| 5             | 100          | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,140 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,260         |
| 3             | 60           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,210 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,220         |

> | 4             | 80           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,212 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,240         |

Reviewer: - Move RCV clock to front
- Just use milliseconds for time values

^ 想像Receiver 端收到1~5 packate, 計算Packet Delivery Time 的範例。

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quest 2: packet delivery time 

| Serial Number | PktTimestamp | Time Base    | RCV Clock    | SRT Latency | Drift | Packet Delivery Time |
|---------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------------|-------|----------------------|
| 6             | 120          | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,160 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,???         |
| 7             | 140          | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,180 | 120         | 0     | 00:00:00,???         |

- 6: 00:00:00,280
- 7: 00:00:00,300

---
[.footer: https://qiita.com/tomoyafujita/items/2e10a9b9d463a36d4a3e]

![inline](srt-too-late-packet-drop.png)

---
[.build-lists: true]
![original](background.png)
# Too Late Packet
- Sender will drop packets that have no chance to be delivered in time.
- Packet is considered "too late" if the packet timestamp is older than **TLPKTDROP_THRESHOLD**
- Receiver will "skip" this packet and send a fake ACK packet to the sender

---

> # [fit] Quest 3: Starts from with is too late ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] Quiz 3: Starts from with is too late ?
```

[.build-lists: true]

| Serial Number    | PktTimestamp | Time Base    | RCV Clock    | SRT Latency | Drift | TLPKTDROP_THRESHOLD |
|------------------|--------------|--------------|--------------|-------------|-------|---------------------|
| 3                | 60           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,210 | 120         | 0     | 150                 |
| 3 (retransmit-1) | 60           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,235 | 120         | 0     | 150                 |
| 3 (retransmit-2) | 60           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,260 | 120         | 0     | 150                 |

> | 3 (retransmit-3) | 60           | 00:00:00,040 | 00:00:00,285 | 120         | 0     | 150                 |

Reviewer: - Need example
- Move "SRT Latency" and "TLPKTDROP_THRESHOLD" to be out of the table
- Move RCV Clock to front

- retransmit-2 is too late.

^ 怎麼算？ 60 + ,040 + 150 = ,250

---
# What protocol do we use, why ?

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we select RTMP over WebRTC at very beginning

- WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.
- RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.
- Lack of newer codecs support

---

> # [fit] Compareison video RTMP vs SRT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] IRL Comparison: RTMP vs SRT.
```

footer: **SWAG** backend team
slidenumbers: true
build-lists: false

# [fit] Go download **demo** resources.
- https://shortlink/resource.
- An QRCode

---

![fit](cover.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT
- Deep dive into SRT
- What protocol are we use, why ?
- DEMO

---
[.footer: https://www.wowza.com/blog/history-of-streaming-media]

![inline](livestream-protocols-history.png)

---
[.build-lists: false]
![original](background.png)

# RTMP 
- **TCP** based
- Supported codecs:
    - video: H.264
    - audio: AAC
- Latency (3 ~ 5s)
- RTMP still supported on many platform as publish protocol even though flash player is offically dead.
    
---
![original](background.png)

# RTMP - Summary
- Pros:

>     - High device compatabillity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - High device compatibility
```

>     - Low resource usage due to TCP packets ordering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Low resource usage since TCP took care of packets ordering.
```

- Cons:
    - Old codecs[^1]
    - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issues.

[^1]: [RTMP Extended](https://github.com/veovera/enhanced-rtmp)

^ 

> - Adobe stop update RTMP and didn't submit to RFC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adobe stopped updating RTMP and didn't submit to RFC.
```

> - 完全依賴TCP 處理 loss packet, 容易在網路不穩情況受 congestion control 影響造成 delay.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 完全依賴 TCP 處理 loss packet, 容易在網路不穩情況受 congestion control 影響造成 delay.
```

- Enhanced-RTMP support VP9, HEVC, and AV1[^Enhanced-RTMP]

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC

- **UDP** (default) and **TCP** (TURN)
- Supported codecs:
    - video: VP8, VP9, H.264 (H.265, AV1 ... in progress)
    - audio: Opus (... inprogress)
- Latency (< 500ms)
- Products: Discord [^2] ,Google meet

[^2]: [Discord blog discribe their webRTC architecture](https://discord.com/blog/how-discord-handles-two-and-half-million-concurrent-voice-users-using-webrtc)

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why WebRTC is not codec agnostic ?

> - Relies codecs supported by underlying browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Relies codecs to be supported by underlying browser.
```

- Browsers don't support specific codecs for various reasons, like expensive license to use H.265.
- Hardware acceleration requirement for some codecs like H.265, AV1 
(But newer chrome starts support hardware acceleration)

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)
# How does WebRTC handle packet loss ?
- Forward Error Correction (FEC): Add **redundant information** to the transmitted packets, Allowing receiver to **reconstruct** lost packets even if they are not received.

- NACK: Notify sender to retransmit missing packets and fill in the gaps to maintain playback continuity.

- Adaptive Bitrate Control: Dynamically adjust the bitrate of the transmitted media stream based on network conditions.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Summary

- Pros:
    - High stability under bad network conditions

>     - Strong Community support, work on almost every browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Strong Community support, works on almost every browser.
```

    - Strong security ensured by DTLS[^3], SRTP[^4]
- Cons:

>     - Hard to scale when there's multi participants

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Hard to scale when there's multiple participants
```

    

[^3]: [Datagram Transport Layer Security](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6347)

[^4]: [Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based

> - Supported codec: codec agnostic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Supported codec: Codec agnostic
```

- Latency: (< 500ms)
- Loss packet handling: FEC, ARQ, Too-late packet
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery (TSBPD), optimize decoder performance.

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

# Why SRT codec agnostic ?

> - It doesn't have any codecs limitation on data processing, 
> the responsibility of encoding/decoding fall on upstream app using SRT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It doesn't have any codecs limitation on data processing, 
the responsibility of encoding/decoding fall on upstream/downstream app using SRT.
```

- Acts as a normal udp packet that wraps SRT content.

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT - Summary

- Pros:

>     - Codec agnostic
>     - High stability under bad network conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Codec agnostic.
    - High stability under bad network conditions.
```

    - Strong security ensured by built-in AES.
- Cons:
    - Not support by native web, require special player.

>     - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality.
```

---
![original](background.png)

| Protocol             | RTMP        | WebRTC                                         | SRT            |
|----------------------|-------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Supported Codecs     | H.264, AAC  | H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited      |
| Latency              | < 5s        | < 500ms                                        | < 500ms        |
| Security             | RTMPS/RTMPE | Built in (DTLS, SRTP)                          | Built in (AES) |
| Disruption Tolerance | Average     | Good                                           | Good           |

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quiz 1: What video/audio codec does 
# [fit] **RTMP** support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
# [fit] Deep dive into
# [fit]  **SRT**

---
[.footer: https://qiita.com/tomoyafujita/items/2e10a9b9d463a36d4a3e]
![inline](srt-tsbpd.png)

^ 每個packet都會有serial number

---
![original](background.png)

# Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery
- Timestamps allow the receiver to **reorder** packets before handover to decoder.

> - Ensuring packets are decoded and displayed in the correct order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensuring packets are delivered to the decoder in the correct order
```

- If packet still in sender's buffer and not determined too late, it will be schedule into queue for sending.
- Periodically packet loss report.

---
[.build-lists: true]
# Packet Delivery Time

$$PktTsbpdTime = TsbpdTimeBase + PktTimestamp + TsbpdDelay + Drift$$

- $$TsbpdTimeBase$$ : Time base reflects the time difference between local clock of the receiver and the sender
- $$PktTimestamp$$ : Data packet timestamp
- $$TsbpdDelay$$ : SRT Latency, negotiated between sender and receiver on handshake.
- $$Drift$$ : Adjust the fluctuations between sender and receiver clock.

---

| Serial Number | Pkt Timestamp | Time Base | SRT Latency | Drift | Packet Delivery Time |
|---------------|---------------|-----------|-------------|-------|----------------------|
| 1             | 20            | 40        | 120         | 0     | 180                  |
| 2             | 40            | 40        | 120         | 0     | 200                  |
| 5             | 100           | 40        | 120         | 0     | 260                  |
| 3             | 60            | 40        | 120         | 0     | 220                  |

> | 4             | 80            | 40        | 120         | 0     | 240                  |

Reviewer: - Delivery time should be first column
- Sorted by delivery time, since that is the timeline to follow along

|------|------------------|--------------|-------------|
| 140  | 3                | 60           | ?           |
| 160  | 3 (retransmit-1) | 60           | ?           |
| 180  | 3 (retransmit-2) | 60           | ?           |
| 200  | 3 (retransmit-3) | 60           | ?           |

- $$TlPktDropThreshold = 125$$
- ANS: retransmit-3 is too late.

^ 怎麼算？ Time - 125 < 60
 Time < 185 is not too late

---
# What protocol do we use, why ?

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we select RTMP over WebRTC at very beginning

- WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.
- RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.
- Lack of newer codecs support

---
# [fit] Real World Compareison video RTMP vs SRT.
- Publisher: iPhone 14pro / Larix, 台哥大5G.
- Player: HLS.

---
# Elevator

![inline](srt-elevator.mov)

---
# Underground

![inline](srt-underground.mov)

---- 
![original](background.png)

# What problem did we encounter switching SRT

- Variable tuning
- Unmaintained publisher client library

^ Limited SRT resource

> - ios package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- iOS client side library
```

>     - mememory, resource management no correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Memory, resource management wasn't optimal.
```

>     - srt version is old, seems not maintain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Stale `libsrt` version
```

>     - fork public and patch by ourself

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Had to patch the package ourselves.
```

> - connection not stable, 5 second (srs configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Unstable connection due to a hard coded 5 seconds wait time within downstream ingestion.
```

- Streampack (android), SRTHaishinKit(ios) is haivision wrapper.

> - Stream filter is hook on livrary, need to hook on each library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stream filter is hook on library, need to hook on each library.
```

| 3             | 60           | N           |
| 4             | 80           | N           |
| 5             | 100          | N           |

^ 假設這是一個sender 的 buffer, 哪些packet too late ?

---

![inline](srt-too-late-example.png)

---

# [fit] Quiz 3: Starts from with is too late ?
[.build-lists: true]

| Now | Serial Number    | PktTimestamp | Is Too Late |
|------|------------------|--------------|-------------|
| 140  | 3                | 60           | ?           |
| 160  | 3 (retransmit-1) | 60           | ?           |
| 180  | 3 (retransmit-2) | 60           | ?           |
| 200  | 3 (retransmit-3) | 60           | ?           |

- $$TlPktDropThreshold = 125$$
- ANS: retransmit-3 is too late.

^ 怎麼算？ Time - 125 < 60
 Time < 185 is not too late

---
![inline](srt-too-late-quiz.png)

---
# What protocol do we use, why ?

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we select RTMP over WebRTC at very beginning

- WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.
- RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.
- Lack of newer codecs support

---

> # [fit] Real World Compareison video RTMP vs SRT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] Real World Comparisons: RTMP vs SRT.
```

- Publisher: iPhone 14pro / Larix, 台哥大5G.
- Playback: VLC playing HLS manifest.

---
# Elevator

![inline](srt-elevator.mov)

---
# Underground

![inline](srt-underground.mov)

---- 
![original](background.png)

> # What problem did we encounter switching SRT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# What problems did we overcome to switch to SRT
```

- Forward Error Correction (FEC): Add **redundant information** to the transmitted packets, Allowing receiver to **reconstruct** lost packets even if they are not received.

- NACK: Notify sender to retransmit missing packets and fill in the gaps to maintain playback continuity.

- Adaptive Bitrate Control: Dynamically adjust the bitrate of the transmitted media stream based on network conditions.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Summary

- Pros:
    - High stability under bad network conditions
    - Strong Community support, works on almost every browser.
    - Strong security ensured by DTLS[^3], SRTP[^4]
- Cons:
    - Hard to scale when there's multiple participants
    

[^3]: [Datagram Transport Layer Security](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6347)

[^4]: [Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based
- Supported codec: Codec agnostic
- Latency: (< 500ms)
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery (TSBPD), optimize decoder performance.
- Loss packet handling: FEC, ARQ, Too-late packet

---
[.build-lists: true]

![original](background.png)

> # Why SRT codec agnostic ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Why is SRT codec agnostic ?
```

| 200  | 3 (retransmit-3) | 60           | ?           |

- $$TlPktDropThreshold = 125$$
- ANS: retransmit-3 is too late.

^ 怎麼算？ Time - 125 < 60
 Time < 185 is not too late

---
![inline](srt-too-late-quiz-4.png)

---
![inline](srt-too-late-quiz-3.png)

---
![inline](srt-too-late-quiz-2.png)

---
![inline](srt-too-late-quiz-1.png)

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :white_check_mark:
- Deep dive into SRT :white_check_mark:
- What protocol are we using and why ? :arrow_backward:
- DEMO

---
# [fit] **What** protocol are we using
# [fit] and **why**

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we select RTMP over WebRTC at very beginning

- WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.
- RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.
- Better support for codecs

---- 
![original](background.png)

# What problems did we overcome to switch to SRT

- Variable tuning
- Unmaintained publisher client library

^ Limited SRT resource
- iOS client side library
    - Memory, resource management wasn't optimal.
    - Stale `libsrt` version

>     - Had to patch the package ourselves.

Reviewer: We forked ourselves

| 7             | 140           | 40        | 120         | 0     | ???                  |

- 6: 280
- 7: 300

---
[.footer: https://qiita.com/tomoyafujita/items/2e10a9b9d463a36d4a3e]

![inline](srt-too-late-packet-drop.png)

---
[.build-lists: true]
![original](background.png)
# Too Late Packet
- **Receiver** will "skip" this packet and send a fake ACK packet to the sender
- **Sender** will drop packets that have no chance to be delivered in time.
- Packet is considered "too late" if the packet timestamp is older than **TlPktDropThreshold**

---
![inline 30%](srt-too-late-4.png)

---
![inline 30%](srt-too-late-3.png)

---
![inline 30%](srt-too-late-2.png)

---
![inline 30%](srt-too-late-1.png)

---
- $$NOW = 200$$
- $$TlPktDropThreshold = 150$$

| Serial Number | PktTimestamp | Is Too Late |
|---------------|--------------|-------------|
| 1             | 20           | Y           |
| 2             | 40           | Y           |
| 3             | 60           | N           |
| 4             | 80           | N           |
| 5             | 100          | N           |

^ 假設這是一個sender 的 buffer, 哪些packet too late ?

---

![inline](srt-too-late-example.png)

---

> # [fit] Quiz 3: Starts from with is too late ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] Quiz 3: Which delivery is too late ?
```

    - High platform/encoder compatibility
    - Low resource usage since TCP took care of packets ordering.
- Cons:
    - Old codecs[^1]
    - Vulnerable to bandwidth and network issues.

[^1]: [RTMP Extended](https://github.com/veovera/enhanced-rtmp)

^ 
- Adobe stopped updating RTMP and didn't submit to RFC.
- 完全依賴 TCP 處理 loss packet, 容易在網路不穩情況受 congestion control 影響造成 delay.
- Enhanced-RTMP support VP9, HEVC, and AV1[^Enhanced-RTMP]

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC
- It's a **framework** in combination of protocols and JS APIs.
- **UDP** (default) and **TCP** (TURN)
- Supported codecs:
    - video: VP8, VP9, H.264 (H.265, AV1 ... in progress)
    - audio: Opus (... in progress)
- Latency (< 500ms)
- Products: Discord [^2] ,Google meet

[^2]: [Discord blog discribe their webRTC architecture](https://discord.com/blog/how-discord-handles-two-and-half-million-concurrent-voice-users-using-webrtc)

^Webrtc
- protocols: ICE, SDP, DTLS
- APIs: allow web developers to integrate real-time communication features.

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Pros & Cons

- Pros:
    - High stability under bad network conditions
        - Adaptive Bitrate Control, FEC, NACK

>     - Strong Community support, works on almost every browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Strong community support, works on almost every browser.
```

---
![original](background.png)

| Protocol             | RTMP       | WebRTC                                         | SRT            |
|----------------------|------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Supported Codecs     | H.264, AAC | H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited      |
| Latency              | < 5s       | < 500ms                                        | < 500ms        |
| Security             | RTMPS      | Built in (DTLS, SRTP)                          | Built in (AES) |
| Disruption Tolerance | Average    | Good                                           | Good           |

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quiz 1: What video/audio codec does 
# [fit] **RTMP** support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :white_check_mark:
- What protocol are we using and why ? :arrow_backward:
- Deep dive into SRT
- DEMO

---
# [fit] **What** protocol are we using
# [fit] and **why**

---
![original](background.png)
# Publish protocol we used
- RTMP: 2020 ~ Now
- SRT:  2023.11 ~ Now

---
![original](background.png)

> # Why we select RTMP at the very beginning

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Why we chose RTMP at the very beginning
```

> - RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RTMP is broadly supported by community, sufficient resource.
```

> - WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- WebRTC scenario is mostly for peer to peer, ours scenario is broadcast.
```

| 5             | 100           | 40        | 120         | 0     | 260                  |
| 3             | 60            | 40        | 120         | 0     | 220                  |

^ 想像Receiver 端收到1~5 packate, 計算Packet Delivery Time 的範例。

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quiz 2: packet delivery time 

| Serial Number | Pkt Timestamp | Time Base | SRT Latency | Drift | Packet Delivery Time |
|---------------|---------------|-----------|-------------|-------|----------------------|
| 6             | 120           | 40        | 120         | 0     | ???                  |
| 7             | 140           | 40        | 120         | 0     | ???                  |

- 6: 280
- 7: 300

---
# [fit] Deep dive into **SRT**

- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery :white_check_mark:
- Handle loss packet :arrow_backward:
- Too late packet

---
[.build-lists: true]
![original](background.png)

# [fit] Handle loss packet
Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ)

- Whenever receiver detects packet loss it send NACK to sender to trigger packet retransmission.
- If packet still in sender's buffer and not determined too late, it will be schedule into queue for sending.

> - Periodically packet loss report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Periodical packet loss report.
```

---
![original](background.png)

# WebRTC - Pros & Cons

- Pros:
    - High stability under bad network conditions
        - Adaptive Bitrate Control, FEC, NACK
    - Strong Community support, works on almost every browser.
    - Strong security ensured by DTLS, SRTP
- Cons:
    - Hard to scale when there's multiple participants
    

^ 
- Adaptive Bitrate Control: 依照網路狀況動態調整encode bitrate.
[Datagram Transport Layer Security](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6347)
[Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3711)

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT

- **UDP** based
- Supported codec: Codec agnostic
- Latency: (< 500ms)
- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery (TSBPD), optimize decoder performance.
- Loss packet handling: FEC, ARQ, Too-late packet

---
![original](background.png)

# SRT - Pros & Cons

- Pros:
    - Codec agnostic.
    - High stability under bad network conditions.
    - Strong security ensured by built-in AES.
- Cons:
    - Not support by native web, require special player.
    - Require extra bandwidth for SRT machanism maintain stream quality.

---
[.build-lists: true]

> # [fit] Why there's limitation for codec ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] Codec Limitations
```

RTMP

- Was developed alongside Flash, which heavily utilized FLV for video playback

> - FLV use h.265, aac 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- FLV use h.264, aac 
```

| Latency              | < 5s       | < 500ms                                        | < 500ms        |
| Security             | RTMPS      | Built in (DTLS, SRTP)                          | Built in (AES) |
| Disruption Tolerance | Average    | Good                                           | Good           |

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quiz 1: What video/audio codec does 
# [fit] **RTMP** support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :white_check_mark:
- What protocol are we using and why ? :arrow_backward:
- Deep dive into SRT
- DEMO

---
# [fit] **What** protocol are we using
# [fit] and **why**

---
![original](background.png)
# Publish protocol we used
- RTMP: 2020 ~ Now
- SRT:  2023.11 ~ Now

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we select RTMP at the very beginning

- RTMP is broadly support by community, sufficient resource.
- WebRTC scenario is for peer to peer, ours are broadcast.
- SRT support was limited

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.
- Better support for new codecs

---

> # [fit] real world Comparison video RTMP vs SRT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# [fit] Real World Comparisons: RTMP vs SRT
```

footer: **SWAG** backend team
slidenumbers: true
build-lists: false

# [fit] Go download **demo** resource.

https://tinyurl.com/2024-q1-swag-openday-setup

![inline](setup-instruction.png)

SWAG - Guest
password: *helloswag*

---

![fit](cover.png)

---
![inline](livestream-protocols-history.png)

^RTMP: 1996, include RTMPS
WebRTC: 2011
FTL: 2016 - 2020
SRT: 2017
Enhanced RTMP: 2022

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT
- What protocol are we using and why ?
- Deep dive into SRT
- DEMO

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :arrow_backward:
- What protocol are we using and why ? 
- Deep dive into SRT 
- DEMO

---
[.build-lists: false]
![original](background.png)

# RTMP 
- **TCP** based
- Supported codecs:
    - video: H.264
    - audio: AAC
- Latency (3 ~ 5s)

> - RTMP still supported on many platform as publish protocol even though flash player is offically dead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RTMP is still supported on many platforms as a publishing protocol even though flash player is offically dead.
```

|----------------------|------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| Supported Codecs     | H.264, AAC | H.264, VP9, VP8, Opus, G.711 G.722, iLBC, iSAC | Unlimited      |
| Latency              | < 5s       | < 500ms                                        | < 500ms        |
| Security             | RTMPS      | Built in (DTLS, SRTP)                          | Built in (AES) |
| Disruption Tolerance | Average    | Good                                           | Good           |

---
[.build-lists: true]
# [fit] Quiz 1: What video/audio codec does 
# [fit] **RTMP** support ?

- video: H.264
- audio: AAC

---
![original](background.png)

# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :white_check_mark:
- What protocol are we using and why ? :arrow_backward:
- Deep dive into SRT
- DEMO

---
# [fit] **What** protocol are we using
# [fit] and **why**

---
![original](background.png)
# Publish protocol we used
- RTMP: 2020 ~ Now
- SRT:  2023.11 ~ Now

---
![original](background.png)
# Why we chose RTMP at the very beginning

- RTMP is broadly supported by community, sufficient resource.
- WebRTC scenario is mostly for peer to peer, ours scenario is broadcast.

> - SRT support was limited

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SRT support was limited.
```

-----
![original](background.png)

# Why we switch to SRT

- SRT is more stable under bad internet.

> - Better support for new codecs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Better support for new codecs.
```

---
# [fit] Real World Comparisons: RTMP vs SRT
- Publisher: iPhone 14pro / Larix, 台哥大5G.
- Playback: VLC playing HLS manifest.

---
# Elevator - SRT vs RTMP

![inline](srt-elevator.mov)

---
# Underground - SRT vs RTMP

![inline](srt-underground.mov)

---
# Outline
- RTMP vs WebRTC vs SRT :white_check_mark:
- What protocol are we using and why ? :white_check_mark:
- Deep dive into SRT :arrow_backward:
- DEMO

---
# [fit] Deep dive into **SRT**

- Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery :arrow_backward:
- Handle loss packet
- Too late packet

---
[.build-lists: true]
![original](background.png)

# Timestamp-Based Packet Delivery
- Timestamps allow the receiver to **reorder** packets before handover to decoder.

> - Ensuring packets are delivered to the decoder in the correct order

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Ensuring packets are delivered to the decoder in the correct order.
```

---
# [fit] Real World Compareison video RTMP vs SRT.
- Publisher: iPhone 14pro / Larix, 台哥大5G.

> - Player: HLS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Playback: VLC playing HLS manifest.
```
